

--- PAGE 1 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1337
nature cancer
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
Article
Development and validation of an 
autonomous artificial intelligence agent  
for clinical decision-making in oncology
 
Dyke Ferber1,2, Omar S. M. El Nahhas2, Georg Wölflein3, Isabella C. Wiest2,4, 
Jan Clusmann2,5, Marie-Elisabeth Leßmann2,6, Sebastian Foersch7, 
Jacqueline Lammert8,9,10,11, Maximilian Tschochohei12, Dirk Jäger    1, 
Manuel Salto-Tellez13, Nikolaus Schultz    14, Daniel Truhn    15 & 
Jakob Nikolas Kather    1,2 
Clinical decision-making in oncology is complex, requiring the integration 
of multimodal data and multidomain expertise. We developed and 
evaluated an autonomous clinical artificial intelligence (AI) agent leveraging 
GPT-4 with multimodal precision oncology tools to support personalized 
clinical decision-making. The system incorporates vision transformers for 
detecting microsatellite instability and KRAS and BRAF mutations from 
histopathology slides, MedSAM for radiological image segmentation and 
web-based search tools such as OncoKB, PubMed and Google. Evaluated 
on 20 realistic multimodal patient cases, the AI agent autonomously used 
appropriate tools with 87.5% accuracy, reached correct clinical conclusions 
in 91.0% of cases and accurately cited relevant oncology guidelines 75.5% 
of the time. Compared to GPT-4 alone, the integrated AI agent drastically 
improved decision-making accuracy from 30.3% to 87.2%. These findings 
demonstrate that integrating language models with precision oncology and 
search tools substantially enhances clinical accuracy, establishing a robust 
foundation for deploying AI-driven personalized oncology support systems.
The field of large language models (LLMs) 1 has witnessed remark -
able advancements in recent years. Models such as GPT-4 (ref. 2) have 
demonstrated capabilities that closely mimic human reasoning and 
problem-solving abilities and have shown knowledge across various 
professional disciplines. In the medical field, for instance, GPT-4 has 
achieved a passing score on the United States Medical Licensing Exami-
nation and is able to provide detailed explanations for its responses3. 
In oncology, where clinical decision-making is increasingly complex, 
LLMs can serve as a rapid and reliable reference tool, for instance, by 
providing medical recommendation suggestions from official medical 
guidelines4. This capability could not only aid in daily decision-making 
processes but also educate oncologists to stay updated with the latest 
treatment recommendations.
However, similar to the medical domain itself, where doctors rely 
on information through speech, written text and imaging, the future 
of medical artificial intelligence (AI) is multimodal5. Recently, several 
such AI systems have been introduced 6. Examples include models 
that analyze radiology images together with clinical data7 or integrate 
information from histopathology with genomic8 or text-based infor-
mation9. These advancements have fueled anticipations for the advent 
of generalist multimodal AI systems10,11, characterized by their ability 
to concurrently analyze and reason across any dimension of medical 
information.
However, it remains to be investigated whether such generalist 
multipurpose AI models alone are suitable for medical applications. 
The distribution of human diseases is wide and complex, which is not 
Received: 13 August 2024
Accepted: 29 April 2025
Published online: 6 June 2025
 Check for updates
A full list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper.  e-mail: jakob-nikolas.kather@alumni.dkfz.de


--- PAGE 2 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1338
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
would facilitate the opportunity of accessing the information reposi-
tories that currently exist in hospital systems, allowing for a true model 
for integrated patient care20.
In this study, we build and evaluate an AI agent tailored to interact 
with and draw conclusions from multimodal patient data through 
tools in oncology. Contrarily to the philosophy of an all-encompassing 
multimodal generalist foundation model, we see the achievements 
that specialist unimodal deep learning models have brought to preci-
sion medicine21 as a viable template even in the future by equipping 
an LLM, specifically GPT-4, with additional functions and resources. 
These could be precision oncology deep learning models or the abil-
ity to perform web search, all referred to herein as tools. Specifically, 
this study includes the vision model application programming inter-
face (API) dedicated to generating radiology reports from magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans, 
MedSAM22 for medical image segmentation and in-house developed 
vision transformer models trained to detect the presence of genetic 
alterations directly from routine histopathology slides23, in particular, 
to distinguish between tumors with microsatellite instability (MSI) and 
microsatellite stability (MSS)24 and to detect the presence or absence 
of mutations in KRAS and BRAF. Additionally, the system encompasses 
a basic calculator, capabilities for conducting web searches through 
Google and PubMed, as well as access to the precision oncology data-
base OncoKB25. T o ground the model’s reasoning on medical evidence, 
we compile a repository of roughly 6,800 medical documents and clini-
cal scores from a collection of six different official sources, specifically 
tailored to oncology.
T o quantitatively test the performance of our proposed system, 
we devise a benchmark strategy on realistic, simulated patient case 
journeys. Existing biomedical benchmarks and evaluation datasets are 
captured in current performance benchmarks, where these models are 
predominantly evaluated on a single specific task at a time. In contrast, 
real-world clinical decision-making often requires multistep reasoning, 
planning and repeated interactions with data to uncover new insights 
to make informed and personalized decisions.
Despite advances with models such as Med-PaLM M 11 or Med-  
Gemini12, the complexities to develop a generalist foundation LLM 
that truly performs on par with precision medicine tools remain a 
substantial challenge. Additionally, at present, regulatory policies in 
the United States and the European Union restrict the approval of a 
universal multipurpose AI model, given the philosophy that medical 
devices should fulfill a singular purpose13.
Previous work has shown that some of these limitations can par-
tially be overcome by enriching LLMs with domain-specific informa-
tion. This can be achieved through fine-tuning14 or retrieval-augmented 
generation (RAG) 15, a process that temporarily enhances an LLM’s 
knowledge by incorporating relevant text excerpts from authoritative 
sources into the model, such as medical guidelines16 or textbooks. Yet, 
this strategy, concentrating on augmenting the knowledge base of the 
models, positions LLMs as mere information extraction tools only, 
rather than serving as true clinical assistants. Ideally, such a system 
would engage in reasoning, strategizing and performing actions on 
patient records and retrieve or synthesize new information to enable 
customized decision-making. Outside of the medical field, several 
such autonomous AI systems, also termed agents, have been proposed. 
Equipping an LLM with a suite of tools, such as calculators or web 
search, has proven superiority in tasks that require multistep reasoning 
and planning17,18. Similarly, in biomedical research, Arasteh et al. used 
the integrated data analysis tools of an LLM to analyze scientific data, 
achieving results on par with human researchers19. Such an approach 
LLM
agent
Knowledge database
Text embedding
model (3-large)
3,072
Text feature vector
Store
Medical guidelines
General purpose and domain-specific medical tools
Send query
Retrieve 
context
LLM
agent
Send 
results
Response
Strategy
Web search Calculator Imaging AI Pathology AI
GPT-4 Vision
MSI
KRAS
BRAF
Select tools 
Radiology
report
Med SAM
segmentation
...
Specialist AI
sequentialParallel
~ 6,800 guidelines
Keyword filter
Python
Interpreter
+ -x /
Patient case
1 2
4
4
5
3
Histological analysis
MSS; prob0.97
BRAF wt; mut prob 0.03
KRAS wt; mut prob 0.48
Radiology report:
The CT scan shows multiple liver and
lung metastases ...
PubMed query:
Novel treatment options for BRAF V600E 
include ...
MedSAM: tumor size
11/2023:  1315;  02/2024: 2744
Use calculator (divide):
“The tumor size increased by 208%.”
Decide: progressive disease.
Repeat max
n times 
Agent pipeline
PubMed
OncoKB
PubMed
Fig. 1 | High-level overview of the LLM agent framework. A schematic overview 
of our LLM agent pipeline. At its core, our system accesses a curated knowledge 
database comprising medical documents, clinical guidelines and scoring tools. 
This database is refined from a broader collection through keyword-based 
search, with the selected documents undergoing text embeddings for efficient 
storage and retrieval (1). The framework is further augmented with a suite of 
medical tools, including specialized web search capabilities through platforms 
such as Google, PubMed and access to the OncoKB API. The agent’s capabilities 
are further expanded through the integration of a vision model tailored for 
generating detailed reports from CT and MRI scans, alongside MedSAM, a state-
of-the-art medical image segmentation model and access to a simple calculator. 
Additionally, the system uses vision transformers specifically developed for the 
prediction of MSI versus MSS and the detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations 
in microscopic tumor samples (2). Given a simulated patient case, all tools are 
selected autonomously by the agent (3) with a maximum of ten per invocation 
and can be used either in parallel or in a sequential chain (4). This way, the agent 
can generate relevant patient information on demand and use this knowledge 
to query relevant documents within its database (4). This enables it to generate 
a highly specific and patient-focused response that integrates the initial clinical 
data with newly acquired insights, all while being substantiated by authoritative 
medical documentation (5).


--- PAGE 3 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1339
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
designed for one or two data modalities26 and are restricted to closed 
question-and-answer formats. Recent advancements have been made 
with the introduction of new datasets by Zakka et al.16, targeting the 
enhancement of open-ended responses, and LongHealth27, focusing 
on patient-related content. Yet, these datasets are limited to text and 
do not capture multimodal data, such as the combination of CT or MRI 
images with microscopic and genetic data, alongside textual reports. 
Therefore, in the present study, we develop and assess our agent using 
a dataset comprising 20 realistic and multidimensional patient cases, 
which we generate with a focus on gastrointestinal oncology. For each 
patient case, the agent follows a two-stage process. Upon receiving the 
clinical vignette and corresponding questions, it autonomously selects 
and applies relevant tools to derive supplementary insights about the 
patient’s condition, which is followed by the document retrieval step to 
base its responses on substantiated medical evidence, duly citing the 
relevant sources. T o evaluate the results, we designed a blinded manual 
evaluation by four human experts, focusing on three areas: the agent’s 
use of tools, the quality and completeness of the textual outputs and the 
precision in providing relevant citations. For effective tool application, 
the agent must first recognize the utility of a tool, comprehend the nec-
essary inputs and then extract these inputs from the provided patient 
information. We provide an overview of our entire pipeline in Fig. 1. A 
detailed description of our methodology is provided in the Methods.
Results
Tool use and retrieval improve LLM responses
T o first demonstrate the superiority of combining medical tools and 
retrieval with an LLM, we compared our agent to GPT-4 alone. As an 
illustration, in Fig. 2a, we highlight three examples where tools and 
retrieval enabled the LLM to accurately solve cases, whereas, without 
these enhancements, GPT-4 either stated that it could not solve the 
patient case and provided hypothetical answers instead or drew incor-
rect conclusions, such as falsely assuming ‘disease progression’ or 
‘no evidence of disease’ (in red). In contrast, the agent, by using tools, 
correctly identified treatment response and the presence of disease 
progression (in green). T o quantify this, we assessed the model’s ability 
to develop a comprehensive treatment plan for each patient, specifying 
appropriate therapies on the basis of recognizing disease progression, 
response or stability, mutational profile and all other relevant informa-
tion, much like an oncologist would. Therefore, we compiled a set of 
109 statements (completeness) for 20 different patient cases. We show 
that GPT-4 alone only provided 30.3% of the expected answers. How-
ever, our agent’s responses achieved a 87.2% success rate, with only 14 
instances not being covered (Fig. 2b). Overall, our results demonstrate 
that enhancing LLMs with tools drastically improves their ability to 
generate precise solutions for complex, realistic medical cases instead 
of providing only generic or even wrong responses when using LLMs 
in an out-of-the-box manner.
GPT-4 handles complex chains of tool use
We next investigated the overall capabilities and limitations of our agent 
across a panel of benchmarks in greater depth. T o provide better guid-
ance, we present one complete, simulated patient case and detail every 
step, from input over tool usage to the model’s final output in Fig. 3. All 
tasks for the model and all answers are shown in Supplementary Note 1.
First, we evaluated the agent’s ability to recognize and success-
fully use tools (Fig. 4 ). Of 64 required tool invocations to fully solve 
all given patient cases, the agent correctly used 56, achieving an over-
all success rate of 87.5%, with no failures among the required tools. 
The remaining 12.5% of tools were required but missed by the model. 
There were two instances where the model tried to call superfluous 
tools without the necessary data available, which resulted in failures 
(Fig. 4, ‘tool use’). We provide an overview of each tool’s invocation 
status in Supplementary Table 1. T o provide an illustrative example, 
in the patient case from Fig. 3 , GPT-4 used its tools to evaluate the 
patient’s conditions by first identifying tumor localization from patient 
data and generating segmentation masks with MedSAM. It calculated 
tumor progression by measuring the segmented area’s growth and 
referenced the OncoKB database for mutation information. The model 
then performed literature searches and histological modeling to select 
As an AI developed by OpenAI, I’m unable to access or 
analyze real patient data, images, or external databases 
directly, nor can I use tools for precise measurement of 
lesions described in radiology reports. Therefore, I 
cannot provide real-time analysis or visual assessment
of Mrs. Chen’s radiology images (February 3 2024.png 
and June 25 2024.png) or perform precise 
measurements of the lesions. However, based on the 
provided information, I can oﬀer a hypothetical and 
educational response to the query regarding Mrs.
Chen’s current state of disease and a detailed treatment 
plan.
Based on the provided data and tool results, Mrs. 
Chen's metastatic colorectal cancer has demonstrated 
progression from February to June 2024. The significant 
increase in the size of lung metastases, as quantified by 
the segmentation tool results showing an increase in the 
overall area of the lesions from 702 to 2798 square 
units, indicates that the disease is not adequately 
controlled under the current regimen of FOLFIRI and 
bevacizumab [Tool]. Furthermore, the genetic mutation 
analysis revealing MSS status and the absence of 
BRAF and KRAS mutations provides valuable 
information for guiding future treatment decisions [Tool].
Given the progression of disease despite current 
systemic therapy, and considering Mrs. Chen's stable 
ECOG performance status of 1, which suggests she 
remains in relatively good condition to tolerate treatment, 
the following treatment plan is proposed: ...
GPT-4
Tools
RAG
GPT-4
Given Mrs. Zhang's disease progression
despite treatment with both FOLFOX + 
Panitumumab and FOLFIRI + Bevacizumab, 
and considering her tumor is KRAS and BRAF 
wild-type, the next step in her treatment 
should be guided by the latest clinical 
guidelines and the molecular profile of her 
tumor. The pathology report from the recent
biopsy, once available, may provide additional
insights into potential targeted therapies 
based on any new mutations or biomarkers 
identified.
Based on the comprehensive analysis of Mrs. 
Zhang's medical history, radiological data, and 
genetic testing, we have a clear picture of her 
current
oncologic status and can make informed 
recommendations for her ongoing treatment 
strategy.  (...) 
-The quantitative analysis of liver metastases 
from CT scans in February 2024 and June 
2024 shows a significant decrease in the size 
of liver metastases from 5980 square units to 
2181 square units, indicating a substantial 
response to the FOLFIRI + Bevacizumab 
treatment [Tool].
-Genetic analysis indicates MSI-High status
(...)
Current State of Disease: Based 
on the most recent follow-up and 
imaging data available up to March 
2024, Mrs. Patel shows no 
evidence of disease (NED). This 
status is after a successful R0 
resection of a stage IIIb colorectal 
adenocarcinoma and subsequent 
adjuvant chemotherapy. Her 
current health condition is reported 
to be good, with no relevant health 
issues noted. 
Based on the most recent imaging 
and clinical data, Mrs. Patel's 
disease has progressed from no 
evidence of disease (NED) to 
metastatic disease involving the
liver and potentially the spleen, as 
evidenced by the July 2024 CT 
scan showing multiple hypodense 
lesions [Tool]. This progression
necessitates a comprehensive 
reassessment of her treatment 
strategy to address the metastatic 
spread.
bExample responses from GPT-4 alone in comparison to GPT-4 with tool use and RAG Completenessa
100
87.2%
95/109
30.3%
33/109
GPT-4 GPT-4
Tools
RAG
Tools
RAG
80
60
Percentage 40
20
0
Fig. 2 | T ool use and RAG improves LLM performance. a, T op, to demonstrate 
the superiority of our approach compared to a standard LLM, we highlight 
three cases where GPT-4 without tool use either fails to detect the current state 
of the disease for a given patient or provides very generic responses. Bottom, 
in contrast, tool access and retrieval enable the model to provide detailed 
information, such as measuring tumor surface and making appropriate 
decisions. b, The performance comparison shows a higher fraction of responses 
being evaluated as complete on our completeness benchmark for the agent with 
tool use and RAG versus GPT-4 alone.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1340
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
Stage 2: RAG + response generation
Question
Clinical 
Context
Ms. Xing, a 33-year-old patient, was diagnosed with cholangiocellular carcinoma in early 2023. Following her diagnosis, she underwent a complete surgical resection (R0) and was treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy using capecitabine for six months. Subsequent imaging showed no evidence of disease recurrence until September of the same year, when MRI imaging
("September2023.png") revealed a new, solitary metastasis.
In response, a treatment regimen of gemcitabine and cisplatin was initiated. Considering Ms. Xing's young age, a liver biopsy was performed for comprehensive panel diagnostics. Both imaging
results and panel findings are made available for review:
***
Radiology Report (* …)
Liver: There is one single hypointense lesion in the left lobe of the liver, measuring approximately 0.4 cm in its greatest dimension (Location: [475, 250, 490, 275]). Highly suggestive for recurrence of
the known cholangiocellular carcinoma.
(* …)
Lymph Nodes: There is no enlargement of the abdominal or pelvic lymph nodes.
Peritoneum: No evidence of peritoneal implants or significant fluid accumulation is present.
Strong suspicion of a recurrence of the known CCC due to a solitary metastasis in the left liver.
Molecular report summary:
Microsatellite-Instability High, Mutation in BRAF V600E and CD74-ROS1 variant fusion.
No alterations in NTRK or FGFR2.
***
Currently, the patient experiences recurrent ascites with notable abdominal tension.
Also, a new MRI-scan was performed yesterday (“February2024.png”) by our in house radiologists.
According to the latest radiology report, the MRI scan performed on the patient with the system ID X-09.22 and documented as "February2024.png" revealed a single metastatic lesion in the left lobe
of the liver, delineated by the coordinates 455, 270, 505, 320. The report emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive review by comparing these findings with the images from a previous
examination in September 2023 during the forthcoming tumor board meeting for a detailed analysis. Also, the imaging findings suggest the presence of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Her system ID is X-
09.22.
Please investigate the current state of the disease. What does the new MRI scan show?
Did the metastasis grow? In case of progress, what (targeted) treatment options could we suggest for the molecular tumor board tomorrow? Be aware that the patient is extremely young and we
need all options we could find. Also check any options you can find on google or pubmed.
Stage 1: strategy + tools
GPT-4
Assistant
Solution 
strategy
De fine  t ar g e ts:  [MSI, KRAS, BRAF]  
**
Define target: 
[BRAF,  m u tati o n ,  
600E ]
[C D74–ROS1,  
varian t, fusion]
Define queries: 
t ar g e t ed tr eatm en t  
opti o ns for 
cholangio c ell u l ar 
c ancer w ith 
BRAFV600 E m u tati o n  
and CD74–R OS1
fusion?
Med SAM
Divide
Extract location from text
09/2023 
02/2024
Collect 
clinical
and
genomic
information
518/133 = 3.89
Segmented area
Select tools
RAG
Patient context
+ question
+ tool results
Patient context
+ question
+ tool results
+ medical context
The latest MRI scan from February 2024 reveals that the metastatic lesion in Ms. Xing's left liver lobe has
notably enlarged, growing from an area of 133 in September 2023 to 518, signifying a progression in her
condition. This significant increase highlights the critical need to consider further treatment avenues for Ms.
Xing. Given Ms. Xing’s medical history and the molecular characteristics of her tumor, including the BRAF
V600E mutation and CD74-ROS1 variant fusion,
several targeted therapy options emerge:
1. Dabrafenib and Trametinib: This combination is recommended for BRAF
V600E-mutated tumors, including cholangiocellular carcinoma, based on their eﬀectiveness in other cancers
with similar genetic alterations [Tool]. The combination has FDA approval for BRAF V600E mutant
unresectable or metastatic melanoma and other solid tumors excluding colorectal cancer,
with noted eﬀectiveness in biliary tract cancer [Tool].
2. Crizotinib, Entrectinib, and Repotrectinib: These drugs are identified treatments for ROS1-positive tumors,
primarily in NSCLC. Given the CD74-ROS1 fusion in Ms. Xing’s tumor, these options could be explored for
their potential applicability, despite the primary association with NSCLC [Tool].
3. Encorafenib and Binimetinib: This combination, highlighted through a Google
search, could be considered based on their eﬀectiveness in cancers with BRAF V600E
mutations [Tool]. Although not specifically indicated for cholangiocellular carcinoma, their
use in similar genetic contexts suggests potential applicability.
Regarding chemotherapy options, the current guidelines for cholangiocellular carcinoma
recommend systemic chemotherapy as the primary treatment for advanced disease. Given
Ms. Xing’s prior treatment with gemcitabine and cisplatin, alternative regimens could
include:
- FOLFOX (fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) as a second-line treatment option,
especially for patients who have progressed on a gemcitabine-based regimen [55].
For Ms. Xing, considering her young age and the urgent need for eﬀective management strategies,
participation in clinical trials exploring novel agents or combinations should be strongly considered. This
includes trials for targeted therapies based on her tumor’s molecular profile or emerging immunotherapy
options for cholangiocellular carcinoma.
Given the conflicting information on microsatellite status, further clarification is needed.
The ’check mutations’ tool indicated Microsatellite Stability (MSS), however, the
patient’s molecular report specified that there was Microsatellite Instability (MSI). If
MSI-High status is confirmed, immunotherapy with pembrolizumab could be considered,
as it has shown eﬀectiveness in MSI-High tumors across various cancer types [57].
In summary, for the tumor board discussion, the recommended approach includes
exploring targeted therapy options such as Dabrafenib and Trametinib for the BRAF
V600E mutation and potentially Crizotinib or Entrectinib for the CD74-ROS1 fusion.
Additionally, considering second-line chemotherapy options and the possibility of clinical
trial participation are crucial steps. The significant progression of Ms. Xing’s disease
necessitates a prompt and comprehensive evaluation of these treatment strategies to
optimize her care.
To refine our approach and ensure the most accurate and personalized treatment
recommendations for Ms. Xing, could you please provide the latest comprehensive genomic
profiling of her tumor? This includes any recent sequencing data that might reveal
additional actionable mutations or variants not previously identified. Additionally, detailed
information regarding her response to past treatments, including any side eﬀects
experienced and the duration of response, would greatly enhance our ability to tailor
future therapy options. This data is crucial for leveraging our resources to their fullest
potential in guiding Ms. Xing’s treatment plan.
Progressive
disease
MSS 
BRAF mut
KRAS wt
A
B Multiple rounds 
of tool usage C Write the answer
PubMed
OncoKB
OncoKB
STAMP
ViT
Find tumor location + send images
Find patient ID
and targets
Fig. 3 | Details of the agent’s pipeline in patient case evaluation. The full agent’s 
pipeline for the simulated patient X, showcasing the complete input process and 
the collection of tools deployed by the agent. We abridge the patient description 
for readability (* …). The complete text is available in Supplementary Note 1.  
a,b, In the initial ‘tools’ phase, the model identifies tumor localization from 
patient data and uses MedSAM for the generation of segmentation masks. 
Measuring the area of the segmented region enables the calculation of tumor 
progression over time as the model calculates an increase by a factor of 3.89. The 
agent also references the OncoKB database for mutation information from the 
patient’s context (BRAFV600E and CD74–ROS1) and performs literature searches 
through PubMed and Google. For histological modeling, we must note here 
that we streamlined the processing. The original STAMP pipeline consists of two 
steps, where the first is the timely and computationally intensive calculation of 
feature vectors, which we performed beforehand for convenience. The second 
step is performed by the agent by selecting targets of interest and the location 
of the patient’s data and executing the respective vision transformer (**). c, The 
subsequent phase involves data retrieval through RAG and the production of the 
final response.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1341
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
targets of interest, ultimately producing the final response through 
data retrieval with RAG.
We additionally benchmarked GPT-4 against two state-of-the-art 
open-weights models, Llama-3 70B (Meta) 28 and Mixtral 8x7B (Mis-
tral)29, for which we show exemplary results in Fig. 5a and quantitative 
evaluations in Fig. 5b. We provide results for each patient in Supple -
mentary Tables 2 and 3. Given substantial shortcomings in the latter 
two, we decided to only focus on GPT-4 as it demonstrated reliable and 
highly effective performance in identifying relevant tools and applying 
them correctly to patient cases.
Additionally, we observed that GPT-4 is capable of chaining 
sequential tool calls, using the output from one tool as input for the 
next. For example, in the tool results for patient G in Supplementary 
Note 2, GPT-4 invoked the MedSAM tool twice to obtain segmentation 
masks from two images taken at different time points. Subsequently, 
GPT-4 used the calculator function with the appropriate values from 
MedSAM to determine that the tumor had grown by a factor of 2.14. As 
another example, for patient W (Supplementary Note 2), the model 
used vision transformer models to assess the patient’s mutational sta-
tus, confirming the presence of a suspected BRAF mutation. The model 
Citation
Correctness
Completeness Helpfulness
Tool UseA B C
C C C
100
87.5%
56/64
12.5%
8/64
91.0%
223/245
6.5%
16/245
75.5%
194/257
1.6%
4/257
94.0%
63/67
6.0%
4/67
12.8%
14/109
87.2%
95/109
Required
successful
Required
failed
Required
unused Correct Wrong Harmful
CorrectComplete _ Helpful _ Wrong Irrelevant
Not required
failed
23.0%
59/257
2.4%
6/2452/-0.0%
0/64
80
60
Percentage
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Fig. 4 | Performance of the agent’s pipeline in patient case evaluation. Results 
from benchmarking the LLM agent through manual evaluation conducted 
by a panel of four medical experts. a– c, Steps in the agent’s workflow as 
outlined in Fig. 3. For the metric ‘tool use’ , we report four ratios: represents 
the proportion of tools that were expected to be used to solve a patient case 
and that ran successfully (56/64), with no failures among the required tools. 
Required/unused (8/64) are tools that the LLM agent did not use despite 
being considered necessary. Additionally, there are two instances where a tool 
that was not required was used, resulting in failures. ‘Correctness’ (223/245), 
‘wrongness’ (16/245) and ‘harmfulness’ (6/245) represent the respective ratios 
of accurate, incorrect (yet not detrimental) and damaging (harmful) responses 
relative to the total number of responses. Here, a response is constituted by 
individual paragraphs per answer. ‘Completeness’ (95/109) measures the 
proportion of experts’ expected answers, as predetermined by keywords, that 
the model accurately identifies or proposes. ‘Helpfulness’ quantifies the ratio of 
subquestions the model actually answers to all questions or instructions given 
by the user (63/67). Lastly, we measure whether a provided reference is correct 
(194/257), irrelevant (59/257, where the reference’s content does not mirror the 
model’s statement) or wrong (4/257). Results shown here are obtained from the 
majority vote across all observers, selecting the least favorable response in cases 
of a tie.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1342
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
then queried the OncoKB database to retrieve medical information on 
appropriate management regarding the mutation.
Additionally, we assessed the robustness of the agent across multi-
ple repetitions and diverse patient populations, specifically consider-
ing different combinations in sex (Extended Data Fig. 1a), age (Extended 
Data Fig. 1b) and origin (Extended Data Fig. 1c). Our evaluation showed 
that the primary source of performance variation was the number of 
tools required for each patient case, rather than intrinsic patient fac-
tors (Extended Data Fig. 1d).
In summary, we can demonstrate that GPT-4 can effectively man-
age complex scenarios by sequentially using multiple tools, integrating 
their results and drawing informed conclusions on subsequent tool 
usage on the basis of prior information.
Radiology tools improve GPT-4’s treatment accuracy
Second, we investigated the use of radiology processing tools by the 
agent. In our scenario, GPT-4 had two options: using the GPT-4 Vision 
(GPT-4V) API to generate comprehensive radiology reports (useful 
when no radiology report was provided for a patient) or using MedSAM 
for image segmentation to generate surface segmentation masks of 
the described tumor reference lesions when localizations of reference 
lesions were included in the patient case vignette. For both options, 
the model first had to identify the location where the images were 
stored on the filesystem, extract the order in which the images were 
taken (by date, indicated in the image file names) and send them to the 
appropriate tool. In our evaluations, we found that, despite occasional 
omissions, extraneous details, lack of information or making mistakes 
(highlighted in red in Supplementary Note 2), GPT-4V could nonethe-
less effectively guide the agent’s decision.
Similarly, for MedSAM as a tool, the expected workflow for GPT-4 
involved first locating the relevant patient images on the system, identi-
fying their chronological order and receiving the locations of described 
reference lesions from the patient case vignette. After sending a request 
to MedSAM and receiving the results (tumor segmentation sizes), 
the model was usually expected to use the calculator to determine 
the percentage change according to RECIST criteria. This process is 
schematically illustrated in Fig. 3 , with a detailed example provided 
in Supplementary Note 2 for patient G. We show that, in all instances, 
MedSAM received information on all relevant tumor locations and 
returned results that were helpful to GPT-4 to determine the appropri-
ate next steps on the basis of calculating whether the patient showed 
progressive disease or remained in a stable condition.
In summary, we show that our pipeline is able to autonomously 
handle multiple steps, such as determining the need for specific tools, 
locating the relevant data, understanding their chronological order, 
sending requests to the appropriate tool, receiving results and inte -
grating these into the next steps of its decision-making, for instance, 
using a calculator to compare tumor sizes over time. All of these steps 
are managed fully autonomously, without human supervision, by the 
LLM agent.
Evaluations show accurate, helpful and reliable responses
Thirdly, a central point in our analysis was the assessment of response 
accuracy (correctness). T o evaluate this, we segmented the responses 
into smaller, evaluable items on the basis of the appearance of cita-
tions or transitions in topic within subsequent sentences, resulting 
in a total of 245 assessable statements. Our evaluations found 223 
(91.0%) of these to be factually correct and 16 (6.5%) to be incorrect, 
while 6 (2.4%) were flagged as potentially harmful. Detailed instances 
of erroneous and harmful responses are provided in Supplementary 
Table 4 for review.
Remarkably, the agent was capable of resolving issues, even in 
instances where contradictory information was provided in a patient’s 
description, such as discrepancies in reported mutations versus results 
of testing such mutations using tools. In such cases, the agent pointed 
out these inconsistencies, recommended further genetic confirma -
tion and outlined potential treatment options based on the results 
(patients D and X). An illustrative example of the model’s response is 
presented in Fig. 3.
Next, we assessed the degree of helpfulness of the agent by evaluat-
ing the proportion of subquestions it answered sophistically according 
to the human evaluators. Among the aggregate of 67 queries, 63 (94.0%) 
were categorized as having been effectively addressed.
Fourth, aiming to ensure transparency in the decision-making 
process, we instigated its adherence to citing relevant sources. Through 
manual review, we determined that, of the 257 citations provided in 
the models’ responses, 194 (75.5%) were accurately aligned with the 
model’s assertions, while 59 (23.0%) were found to be unrelated and 
merely 4 (1.6%) were found to be in conflict with the model’s statement. 
These findings are promising, highlighting that instances of erroneous 
extrapolation (so-termed hallucinations) by the model are limited. 
Supplementary Notes 2 and 3 respectively display the unprocessed 
complete results from using the tools and the entire model outputs. 
Detailed evaluation results from each human observer are elaborated 
on in Supplementary Tables 4–6. Evaluation results for GPT-4 without 
tools and retrieval that we benchmarked for completeness can be found 
in Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary Note 3.
Overall, our results show that GPT-4 with tools and RAG can deliver 
highly accurate, helpful and well-cited responses, which enhances its 
ability to handle complex medical scenarios and provide support for 
clinical decision-making.
Discussion
Our results demonstrate that combining precision medicine tools 
with an LLM enhances its capabilities in problem solving, aligning with 
the concept of using LLMs as ‘reasoning engines’ (ref. 30). As we have 
shown, GPT-4 alone only generates very generic or wrong responses. 
However, integrating three core elements (a reasoning engine, a 
knowledge database and tools) enables us to effectively address this 
limitation, greatly improving accuracy and reliability. Additionally, 
using tools has several further advantages. Despite the potential future 
development of a generalist medical multimodal foundation model10, 
its efficacy in addressing very specialized medical queries, such as 
predicting rare mutations or measuring disease development on the 
millimeter scale compared to narrower, domain-specific models, 
remains uncertain. Moreover, maintaining the alignment of such a 
generalist model with the evolving medical knowledge and updates 
in treatment guidelines is challenging, as it requires retraining model 
components on new data. Our tool-based approach, however, addresses 
all of these issues. It allows for the rapid update of medical knowledge 
by simply replacing documents in the database or searches through 
Google or PubMed, eliminating the need for direct modifications to 
the core model itself. Similarly, state-of-the-art medical devices that 
are approved by regulatory authorities can be included in our setup. 
Additionally, by using RAG, our system effectively addresses a major 
limitation in current LLMs, which often tend to hallucinate by provid-
ing wrong but seemingly correct or plausible answers to questions 
beyond their knowledge4. Mitigating this issue is particularly critical 
in sensitive domains such as healthcare. We show that our approach 
demonstrates a high capability in delivering accurate answers, sup-
ported by relevant citations from authoritative sources, which also 
facilitates quick fact-checking as the agent returns the exact original 
text from the guideline documents.
Our work has several limitations. The most notable is the small 
sample size for evaluation. Constructing these cases from real-world 
data requires careful manual crafting and evaluation while adhering to 
data protection standards, especially for cloud-based processing. We, 
therefore, consider our work as a proof-of-concept study for agentic 
AI workflows in oncology and encourage future efforts to develop 
larger-scale benchmark cases.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1343
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
An important aspect beyond the scope of our study, which should 
be addressed in future research, is the selection of medical tools. While 
the core focus of our work lies in the tool-using abilities of language 
model agents, it is essential to recognize that individual tools require 
better independent optimization and validation. For example, we do 
not possess annotated ground-truth segmentation masks for compari-
son to MedSAM but use clinical endpoints such as progressive disease 
or tumor shrinkage as our primary metric to measure outcomes, which 
even more closely reflects the clinical workflow. As another example, 
vision transformers in our study were trained and tested on data from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and some radiology images available 
online may have been included in the pretraining of GPT-4V. In a pro-
duction environment, however, such tools would simply be replaced 
with better-validated and extensively tested alternatives, such as the 
clinical-grade MSIntuit model31. Overall, we believe that, by prioritiz-
ing clinical endpoints to validate our agent pipeline, we can offer new, 
directly relevant evidence and metrics to address the current scarcity 
of objective measures for AI agents in healthcare.
Regarding the agent, although equipped with a broad array of tools 
compared to other frameworks17, it remains in an experimental stage, 
thus limiting clinical applicability. One notable restriction for instance 
lies in the provision of only a singular slice of radiology images and 
the yet limited capabilities of GPT-4V (ref. 32) in interpreting medical 
images. We anticipate great progress in generalist foundation models 
with greatly enhanced capabilities in interpreting three-dimensional 
(3D) images, including medical images. In this regard, we expect the 
development of more advanced, specialized medical image–text mod-
els, similar to the recently introduced Merlin model for 3D CT imaging33, 
which would allow adding these models as additional tools instead 
of simple ones such as MedSAM into our pipeline. Furthermore, an 
image–text model for radiology could also incorporate information 
on patient history and previous therapies to evaluate the current state 
of the disease like a radiologist would, instead of relying on lesion size 
changes only.
Moreover, our current agent architecture is a static design choice. 
Medical professionals, however, have access to an extensive array of 
Mixtral
GPT-4
LLama
a
b
Example tool results from three state-of-the-art LLMs
Tool-calling performance of GPT-4, llama-3 70B and mixtral 8×7B
100 GPT-4
Llama-3 70B
Mixtral 8×7B
Required
Successful
Required
Failed
Not required
Failed
Required
Unused
87.5%
56/64
39.1%
25/64
7.8%
5/64 0.0%
0/64
42.2%
27/64
50.0%
32/64
12.5%
8/64
18.8%
12/64
42.2%
27/64
62/–
2/– 4/–
80
60
Percentage
Counts
40
20
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1. Segmentation o f MRI images: The MRI images from
De c e m be r  3, 2 023 , and Feb r u ar y 28,  2024,  were a n a l yzed  t o  
de t er m i n e t he siz e  of th e h e pato c ellular  carcino m a (H CC) 
lesion. T he s eg m e n tation t ool prov i ded t h e size s  o f  t h e 
region s of  i nter e s t  as follows:
- De c e m ber 3, 202 3, M RI: The  ar e a  was  207 7  s qua re unit s.
- Febru a r y 28,  20 24, MR I: The a r e a  wa s  205 7 s qua re unit s.
2. Calcu lat i o n  o f  t u m o r  vo l u me c h a nge : The  c h a n ge in  
t he t u m o r 's si ze w a s c a l c u l a t ed t o  de t e r mine if  th e dis e ase 
had progre s s e d a cco r ding  t o  RECI ST c ri teri a . The  c a l c u l a t ions 
reve a l e d:
- The diﬀer en c e  in t u m o r  size  be t ween t h e  t wo date s wa s
-20 s quare unit s, in dicating a  slight de c rea s e in size.
- T h e p er centag e c hang e in tum o r  s i ze wa s  c a l c u l ated a s 
a ppr o x i m a t e l y 0. 96%.
Fig. 5 | Benchmarking of tool use for Llama-3 70B, Mixtral 8x7B (both open-
weight models) and GPT -4 (proprietary). a, Example tool results from three state-
of-the-art LLMs (Llama-3, Mixtral and GPT-4). While the former two demonstrate 
failures in calling tools (or performing meaningless superfluous calculations in 
the case of Llama), GPT-4 successfully uses image segmentation on the MRI images 
and uses the calculator to calculate tumor changes in size. b, T ool benchmarking 
calling performance for these three models in a similar fashion to Fig. 4. Overall, 
our findings reveal that both open-weight models demonstrate only extremely 
poor function-calling performance. First, both models struggle to identify 
necessary tools for a given patient context (18.8% of required tools remain unused 
by Llama and even 42.2% for Mistral). Next, even in instances where the correct tool 
was identified, the model frequently failed to supply the necessary and accurate 
function arguments (‘required, failed’). This deficiency results in invalid requests 
that disrupt program functionality (Llama, 42.2%; Mixtral, 50.0%), ultimately 
leading to crashes. We saw none of these cases for GPT-4. Consequently, for Llama 
and Mixtral, the overall success rates were low, registering only 39.1% (Llama) and 
7.8% (Mixtral) (‘required, successful’). Moreover, we saw that the Llama model 
frequently used superfluous tools, for example, performing random calculations 
on nonsense values or hallucinating (inventing) tumor locations during imaging 
analysis that did not exist. This led to 62 unnecessary tool calls and failures (‘not 
required, failed’) across all 20 patient cases evaluated. The major shortcoming of 
the Mixtral model was its frequent disregard for tool use, resulting in fewer than 
one in ten tools running successfully.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1344
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
complex tools and can alternate between tool usage and knowledge 
retrieval. For AI agents, integrating RAG and tool use concurrently 
could also be complementary, as RAG could assist in guiding the agent 
through complicated steps of tool application for specific diagnostic 
or treatment decisions. This synergy might help improve complex 
workflows with more and more challenging tools, which remains an 
area of further exploration.
Additionally, despite being implemented as a multiturn chat agent, 
our evaluation is currently confined to a single interaction. As a next 
step, we aim to incorporate multiturn conversations, including human 
feedback for refinement, akin to a ‘human-in-the-loop’ concept34.
Furthermore, we restricted our patient scenarios to oncological 
use cases only, yet it is important to note that the underlying frame-
work could be adapted to virtually any medical specialty, given the 
appropriate tools and data.
Next, regarding data protection in real-world settings, current reg-
ulatory restrictions make GPT-4 unsuitable because of its cloud-based 
nature, which necessitates transferring sensitive patient data to pro-
prietary commercial servers. Consequently, we regard GPT-4 as a 
best-in-class model for proof-of-concept purposes and aim to explore 
open-weight models that can be deployed on local servers in the near 
future. Newer and better models, especially Llama-3 405B (ref. 35 ), 
might be promising candidates.
Moreover, medically fine-tuned models or models broadly opti-
mized for tool use, such as Hermes-3-Llama-3.1 (ref. 36), also show 
considerable potential as local solutions.
Additionally, while our model receives relevant context from the 
RAG pipeline to provide accurate citations, there are several modi -
fications and potential improvements to the retrieval process that 
we suggest exploring in future work. For instance, we used generalist 
embedding, retrieval and reranking models, whereas Xiong et al. 37 
demonstrated that domain-specific models can enhance retrieval per-
formance. Moreover, for rare terms (such as rare diseases), exact match 
keyword searches can outperform similarity searches in embedding 
space and both can even be combined (also termed hybrid search38).
Moreover, modeling long context dependencies could be fur -
ther improved by using models with larger context windows, such as 
Gemini 1.5 (ref. 39). This capability is especially crucial when scaling 
our approach to settings where patient information is not restricted 
to a single one-page case vignette but distributed across hundreds  
of documents.
Lastly, from a production setting perspective, another critical 
aspect is to consider how the LLM handles temporal dependencies in 
treatment recommendations. For instance, in lung cancer, molecular 
targeted treatments are subject to rapid changes and official guidelines 
are not always updated at the same pace as the latest trial results. In 
such a setting, our multitool agent could cross-reference informa -
tion from official medical guidelines with more up-to-date informa -
tion received through internet and PubMed searches. Previous work 
already showed that LLMs can reliably identify temporal differences 
in medical documents4.
Looking ahead, we anticipate more progress in the development 
of AI agents with even improved capabilities through further scaling. 
As a parallel step in this direction, Zhou et al.40 developed MedVersa, 
an AI system for medical image interpretation that leverages an LLM 
as a central ‘orchestrator’ . This model is fully trainable to determine 
whether tasks can be completed independently or should be delegated 
to a specialist vision model and has demonstrated superior perfor -
mance across multiple medical imaging benchmarks, often surpassing 
state-of-the-art models. The training of such a system holds immense 
potential, as it might allow models to learn critical concepts such as 
uncertainty, enabling them to recognize their limitations and del -
egate tasks to specialist models whenever appropriate. Although our 
model currently shows a strong ability to use given tools, task-specific 
fine-tuning and few-shot prompting 41 (providing examples to the 
model) could further improve performance, particularly when increas-
ing complexity with the addition of more and more complex tools. 
Additionally, we could enhance the system by incorporating human 
feedback on edge cases where the initial model performed poorly, 
similar to a human-in-the-loop approach. In the medical context, this 
method was already shown to improve prediction accuracy, as demon-
strated in the context of molecular tumor board recommendations42.
T o summarize, in the near future, we envision a framework that 
embodies characteristics akin to the GMAI model with the added abil-
ity to access precision medicine tools tailored to answer any kind of 
specialized clinical questions. This approach has multiple benefits. 
It enables medical AI models to assist clinicians in solving real-world 
patient scenarios using precision medicine tools, each tailored to 
specific tasks. Such a strategy facilitates circumventing data avail -
ability constraints inherent in the medical domain, where data are 
not uniformly accessible across all disciplines, preventing a singular 
entity from developing an all-encompassing foundational model. 
Instead, entities can leverage smaller, specialized models developed 
by those with direct access to the respective data, which could greatly 
improve discovering therapeutic options for personalized treatments. 
Moreover, this modular approach allows for individual validation, 
updating and regulatory compliance of each tool. In cases where exist-
ing tools are unsatisfactory or completely absent, the agent could rely 
on its internal strong medical domain knowledge and either refine 43 
or innovate entirely new tools from scratch. Crucially, this modular 
approach also offers far superior explainability compared to a large, 
generalist black-box model, as physicians can investigate the output 
from each individual tool separately. Herein, our study could serve as 
a blueprint, providing evidence that agent-based generalist medical 
AI is within reach.
T o fully leverage the potential of AI agents in the near future, it 
will be crucial to integrate them as deeply into routine clinical prac -
tice as possible, ideally through direct incorporation into existing 
clinical information systems for live access to patient data with only 
minimal workflow disruption for clinicians. However, this first neces-
sitates addressing many deployment challenges, including concerns 
regarding interoperability with existing systems, data privacy laws 
such as GDPR and HIPAA (in case of cloud-based models), liability and 
accountability issues and the need for regulatory approvals as medical 
devices44, which will also require much broader validation studies to 
show safety and benefits in actual clinical workflows. Lastly, there will 
be a critical need to educate medical professionals to effectively col-
laborate with AI agents while maintaining full authority over the final 
clinical decision-making.
Methods
This study did not include confidential patient information. All 
research procedures were conducted exclusively on publicly accessi-
ble, anonymized patient data and in accordance with the Declaration of 
Helsinki, maintaining all relevant ethical standards. The overall analysis 
was approved by the Ethics Commission of the Medical Faculty of the 
T echnical University Dresden (BO-EK-444102022).
Dataset composition and data collection
The pipeline’s primary goal is to compile a comprehensive dataset from 
high-quality medical sources, ensuring three main components: cor-
rectness, up-to-dateness and contextual relevance, with a particular 
emphasis on including knowledge across all medical domains while 
additionally encompassing information specifically tailored to oncol-
ogy. We restricted our data access to six sources: MDCalc (https://  
www.mdcalc.com/) for clinical scores, UpT oDate and MEDITRON14 
for general-purpose medical recommendations and the Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines from the American Society of Clinical Oncology 45, 
the European Society of Medical Oncology and the German and Eng-
lish subset of the Onkopedia guidelines from the German Society for 


--- PAGE 9 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1345
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
Hematology and Medical Oncology. We retrieved and downloaded the 
relevant documents as either HTML extracted text or raw PDF files. T o 
reduce the number of documents for the embedding step, we applied 
a keyword-based filtering of the document contents, targeting terms 
relevant to our specific use case. Medical guidelines that were obtained 
from the MEDITRON project were directly accessible as preprocessed 
jsonlines files.
Information extraction and data curation from PDF files
The critical challenge in text extraction from PDF documents arises 
from the inherent nature of PDF files, which are organized primar -
ily for the user’s ease of reading and display while not adhering to a 
consistent hierarchical structure, thus complicating the extraction 
process. For instance, upon text mining with conventional tools such 
as PyPDF2 or PyMuPDF , headers, subheaders and key information 
from the main text may be irregularly placed, with titles occasionally 
embedded within paragraphs and critical data abruptly interspersed 
within unrelated text. However, maintaining the integrity of the origi-
nal document’s structure is crucial in the medical field to ensure that 
extracted information remains contextually coherent, preventing any 
conflation or misinterpretation. T o overcome these limitations, we 
used GROBID (generation of bibliographic data), a Java application and 
machine learning library specifically developed for the conversion of 
unstructured PDF data into a standardized TEI46 format. Through its 
particular training on scientific and technical articles, GROBID enables 
the effective parsing of medical documents, preserving text hierarchy 
and generating essential metadata such as document and journal titles, 
authorship, pagination, publication dates and download URLs.
We next programmatically retrieved the raw document text from 
the generated XML fields in the TEI files, concurrently implementing 
data cleansing. This process encompasses the removal of extraneous 
and irrelevant information such as hyperlinks, graphical elements and 
tabular data that was corrupted during the extraction with GROBID, 
as well as any malformed characters or data such as inadvertently 
extracted IP addresses. The diversity of source materials presented 
a further challenge because of their varied formatting schemes. T o 
address this, we meticulously reformatted and standardized the text 
from all sources, denoting headers with a preceding hash symbol (#) 
and inserting blank lines for the separation of paragraphs. The purified 
text, along with its corresponding metadata, was archived in jsonlines 
format for subsequent processing.
Agent composition: RAG
Below, we delineate the detailed architecture of our agent in a two-step 
process, beginning with the creation of our RAG15 database, followed by 
an overview of the agent’s tool use and concluding with an examination 
of the final retrieval and response generation modules. Additionally, we 
highlight the structure of our model in detail in Supplementary Note 4.
Embedding creation and indexing
We leveraged RAG to synergize the generative capabilities of LLMs 
with document retrieval to provide domain-specific medical knowl -
edge (context) to a model. The RAG framework has greatly evolved in 
complexity recently; thus, we break down its architecture into three 
major components (embeddings, indexing and retrieval) and outline 
the implementation details of the first two in the next section. In RAG, 
we begin with the conversion of raw text data into numerical (vector) 
representations, also termed embeddings, which are consequently 
stored in a vector database alongside metadata and the corresponding 
original text (indexing). In more detail, we compute vector embeddings 
using OpenAI’s ‘text-embedding-3-large’ model from text segments of 
varying lengths (512, 256 and 128 tokens), each featuring a 50-token 
overlap, from the curated guideline cleaned main texts in our dataset, 
alongside their associated metadata for potential filtering operations. 
For storage, we use an instance of a local vector database (Chroma) that 
also facilitates highly efficient lookup operations using vector-based 
similarity measures such as cosine similarity (dense retrieval). We store 
documents from different sources in the same collection.
Agent composition: tools
T o endow the LLM with agentic capabilities, we equipped it with an 
array of tools, including the ability to conduct web searches through 
the Google custom search API and formulate custom PubMed queries. 
Information retrieved through Google search underwent text extrac-
tion and purification and was integrated directly as context within 
the model, while responses from PubMed were processed akin to the 
above-described RAG procedure in a separate database.
For the interpretation of visual data, such as CT or MRI scans, the 
LLM agent has access to two different tools. It can either call the GPT-4 
Vision (GPT-4V) model, which is instructed to generate a comprehen-
sive, detailed and structured report, or use MedSAM, which we explain 
in detail below. For both tasks, we primarily use representative slices 
from in-house CT and MRI chest and abdomen series, although a few 
cases are from public datasets, as highlighted in Supplementary Note 
1. Our in-house slices were selected by an experienced radiologist from 
our team, who was blinded to the rest of the study at the time of image 
selection. In scenarios involving multiple images to model disease 
development over time, the model first investigates and reports on 
each image separately before synthesizing a comparative analysis. 
Because of the stringent adherence of OpenAI to ethical guidelines, 
particularly concerning the management of medical image data, we 
framed our patient cases as hypothetical scenarios when presenting 
them to the model. However, instances of refusal still arose, prompting 
us to discard the respective run entirely and initiate a new one from the 
beginning. Additionally, tasks that require the ability of the model to 
precisely measure the size of lesions and compare them over time can 
be solved using MedSAM22. MedSAM produces a segmentation mask for 
a given region of interest on the basis of an image and pixel-wise bound-
ing box coordinates, enabling the calculation of the overall surface area. 
Herein, MedSAM processes each image independently; however, GPT-4 
can track the results from MedSAM back to the original image date, as 
it has access to image file names that are based on date. This capability 
ensures accurate decision-making of lesion development over time. An 
example of this is demonstrated in Supplementary Note 2 under tool 
results for patient G. A potential limitation of the vision tool approach 
is that, for both scenarios, we currently restrict the use to single-slice 
images that additionally need to be taken at the same magnification.
Moreover, we provide access to a simplified calculation tool that 
allows elementary arithmetic operations such as addition, subtrac -
tion, multiplication and division by executing code locally using the 
Python interpreter.
T o facilitate addressing queries related to precision oncology, the 
LLM leverages the OncoKB25 database to access critical information 
on medical evidence for treating a vast panel of genetic anomalies, 
including mutations, copy-number alterations and structural rear -
rangements. More specifically, GPT-4 can send the HUGO symbol, the 
change of interest (mutation, amplification or variant) and a specific 
alteration of interest (such as BRAFV600E) if applicable to the OncoKB 
API that returns a structured JSON object containing potential Food 
and Drug Administration-approved or investigational drug options 
including evidence levels. This enables querying any type of genetic 
arrangement, given it is listed on OncoKB and an appropriate license 
is acknowledged by the user.
Lastly, GPT-4 is also equipped to engage specialized vision trans-
former models for the histopathological analysis of phenotypic altera-
tions underlying MSI24 or KRAS and BRAF mutations. For the KRAS and 
BRAF mutation prediction models, we used a setup similar to Wagner 
et al.23. These models were obtained by training a vision classifier model 
using histopathology features extracted from images of colorectal 
cancer tissue from TCGA. For feature extraction, we used CTranspath47, 


--- PAGE 10 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1346
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
a state-of-the-art transformer model trained through self-supervised 
learning. T o optimize time and computational resources, features 
were pre-extracted with CTranspath, which is a common procedure 
in computational pathology pipelines48. Consequently, instead of the 
original images, GPT-4 transmits these pre-extracted features to the 
MSI, KRAS, and BRAF vision transformers; however, it is important to 
note that this implementation detail is hidden from GPT-4 and, thus, 
has no influence on our overall pipeline. It, however, allows us to reduce 
the time and hardware requirements for each run in a research setting. 
For deployment purposes, one could easily, without making changes 
to the LLM agent itself, hide additional logic to extract features on the 
fly from the original images.
During each invocation, GPT-4 has to determine the availability 
of histopathology images for a patient, locate them within the system 
and select the targets (one, two or all three) for testing. It then receives 
a binary prediction (MSI versus MSS, KRAS mutant versus wild type or 
BRAF mutant versus wild type) along with the mutation probability  
in percentage.
All necessary information for calling the designated tools is deriv-
able or producible from the given patient context. Unlike the retrieval 
phase, which we manually enforced at each invocation, the decision 
regarding the use and timing of tools is dependent only on the agent’s 
reasoning. However, manual intervention to prompt tool usage is pos-
sible, as demonstrated in patients D and X. The specifications for all 
tools are delineated in JSON format, which is provided to the model and 
encompasses a brief textual description of each tool’s function along 
with the required input parameters. From a procedural point of view, 
given an input comprising a variable-length textual patient context and 
a text query, the agent generates an initial action plan, followed by a 
series of iterative tool applications. The deployment of these tools can 
be executed either independently in parallel or sequentially, wherein 
the output from one tool serves as the input for another in subsequent 
rounds; for instance, the size of the segmentation areas obtained from 
two images through MedSAM can be used to compute a ratio and, thus, 
define disease progression, stability or response, as shown schemati-
cally in Fig. 1 and the patient case from Fig. 3.
Agent composition: combine, retrieve and generate responses
The final retrieval and response generation pipeline is implemented 
using DSPy49, a library that allows for a modular composition of LLM 
calls. All instructions to the model can be found in our official GitHub 
repository. Firstly, the model receives the original patient context, 
the posed question and the outcomes from the tool applications as 
input. In a method similar to that described by Xiong et al.50, we used 
chain-of-thought reasoning51 to let the model decompose the initial 
user query into up to 12 more granular subqueries derived from both 
the initial patient context and the outcomes from tool applications. 
This facilitates the retrieval of documents from the vector database 
that more closely align with each aspect of a multifaceted user query. 
Precisely, for each generated subquery we extract the top k most analo-
gous document passages from the collection. Subsequently, these data 
are combined, deduplicated, reranked and finally forwarded to the 
LLM. We highlight this process in more detail as pseudocode in Sup -
plementary Note 4. Each request sent by the LLM to the RAG pipeline 
is transformed into a numerical representation using the same embed-
ding model applied to the medical guidelines. We next use cosine 
distance (lower is better) to compare the query with any embedded 
chunk from the medical guidelines in the vector database, sorting in 
ascending order to retrieve the top 40 vectors, each mapped to their 
respective original text passage. Then, we use Cohere’s reranking 
model (Cohere Rerank 3 English) to reorder the retrieved text passages 
on the basis of their semantic similarity to the LLM’s query. This step 
filters out passages that exhibit falsely high similarity (low distance) in 
embedding space but are contextually irrelevant. For example, a query 
such as ‘Which drug is approved for NSCLC?’ and text from a guideline 
saying ‘Drug A is not approved for non-small cell lung cancer’ may show 
high cosine similarity (low distance), yet the former is irrelevant to the 
query. The reranking step helps to rank such passages lower. From 
the reranked results, we keep only the top ten relevant passages and 
repeat this entire process for each subquery (subtopic) generated by 
the model on the basis of the provided patient information. T o reduce 
token usage, we remove duplicates from the entire collection of guide-
line text chunks, prefixed each with an enumeration of ‘Source [x]: … ’ 
to allow for accurate citations and then sent the data back to the LLM.
Before generating the final answer, we instruct the LLM to generate 
a step-by-step strategy to build a structured response including iden-
tifying missing information that could help refine and personalize the 
recommendations. The resulting model output is then synthesized on 
the basis of all available information, strictly following the strategy as 
a hierarchical blueprint. T o enhance the system’s reliability and enable 
thorough fact-checking, both of which are fundamental in real-world 
medical applications, the model was programmatically configured to 
incorporate citations for each statement (as defined as a maximum of 
two consecutive sentences) using DSPy suggestions49. On the imple-
mentation level, the LLM performs a self-evaluation step, wherein it 
compares its own output to the respective context from our database 
in a window of one to two sentences. We perform a single iteration over 
this procedure. All prompts are implemented using DSPy’s signatures.
LLM tool use benchmarking: Llama-3 70B and Mixtral 8x7B
We additionally performed comparisons of GPT-4 with two 
state-of-the-art open-weight LLMs, namely Llama-3 70B from Meta 
AI28 and Mixtral 8x7B from Mistral 29. On the basis of initial evidence 
from testing, we slightly simplified and shortened the original prompt 
from GPT-4 but left all other parameters with respect to the original 
tool composition unaltered. We evaluated the performance of function 
calling against GPT-4 on the 20 patient cases, reporting the following 
metrics: the fraction of required tool calls that were completed suc -
cessfully (required/successful) and those that were required but failed 
(required/failed). Additionally, we assessed the fraction of necessary 
tool calls that the model failed to invoke (required/unused). Lastly, we 
measured the ratio of superfluous tool calls that the models invoked 
and that failed (not required/failed).
Model specifications
In our study, we consistently used the following models through the 
official OpenAI Python API for all experiments. The core framework for 
the agent and all tools involving an LLM is the gpt-4-0125-preview model 
(GPT-4). For tasks requiring visual processing, the gpt-4-vision-preview 
(GPT-4V) model was used through the chat completions endpoint. 
The temperature value for both models was empirically set to 0.2 
for the agent phase and 0.1 during RAG upon initial experimenta -
tion and no further modifications of model hyperparameters were 
performed. Additionally, for generating text embeddings, we used 
the latest version of OpenAI’s embedding models, specifically the 
text-embedding-3-large model, which produces embeddings with a 
dimensionality of 3,072. T o establish a baseline for comparison without 
tools and retrieval, we also evaluated GPT-4 with identical hyperparam-
eters using a chain-of-thought reasoning module. Additionally, for 
model benchmarking, we used the Meta Llama-3 70B model (llama3-
70b-8192) and Mistral’s Mixtral 8x7B model (mixtral-8x7b-32768) 
through the Groq API, setting temperature values to 0.2 and the maxi-
mum number of output tokens to 4096.
Clinical case generation
T o address the limitations in current biomedical benchmarks, we com-
piled a collection of 20 distinct multimodal patient cases, primarily 
focusing on gastrointestinal oncology, including colorectal, pancre-
atic, cholangiocellular and hepatocellular cancers. Each case provided 
a comprehensive but entirely fictional patient profile, which includes 


--- PAGE 11 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1347
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
a concise medical history overview encompassing diagnoses, notable 
medical events and previous treatments. We paired each patient with 
either a single or two slices of CT or MRI imaging that served as either 
sequential follow-up staging scans of the liver or lungs or simultaneous 
staging scans of both the liver and the lungs at a single point in time. 
Images were obtained predominantly from internal sources from the 
Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University 
Hospital Aachen, but we included a few samples from the web and the 
Cancer Imaging Archive52,53. We highlight these cases in Supplementary 
Note 1. Histology images were obtained from TCGA. We additionally 
included information into genomic variations (mutations and gene 
fusions) in several patient descriptions. T o evaluate our model’s pro-
ficiency in handling complex information, we decided to not pose a 
single straightforward question but instead structured each query 
with multiple subtasks, subquestions and instructions, necessitating 
the model to handle an average of three to four subtasks in each round. 
T o evaluate the robustness of the model in using tools across various 
patient factors (Extended Data Fig. 1), we generated 15 random com-
binations of age, sex and origin for each of the 20 base cases, resulting 
in a total of 300 combinations.
Human results evaluation
T o enhance the assessment of free-text output, we developed a struc-
tured evaluation framework, drawing inspiration from the methodol-
ogy of Singhal et al.54. Our evaluation focused on three primary aspects: 
the use of tools by the agent, the quality of the text output produced by 
the model and the adherence in providing accurate citations.
In reference to the former, we established a manual baseline for 
the expected use of tools necessary for generating additional patient 
information that is crucial for resolving the patient’s task. We measured 
this by the ratio of actual versus expected (required) tool uses. The 
requirement of tool use was defined as either the model is directly 
instructed to use a certain tool or the output of a tool is essential to pro-
ceed in answering the question, which is the default setting in almost 
all situations. Additionally, we assessed the helpfulness of the model, 
quantified by the proportion of user instructions and subquestions 
directly addressed and resolved by the model.
In assessing the textual outputs, our evaluation first encompassed 
factual correctness, defined by the proportion of correct replies rela-
tive to all model outputs. T o segment answers into more manageable 
units, we split each reply according to statement (where a statement is 
considered a segment that concludes with either a reference to litera-
ture or is followed by a shift in topic in the subsequent sentence). Corre-
spondingly, we distinguished between incorrectness and harmfulness 
in responses. Incorrect responses may include suggestions for superflu-
ous diagnostic procedures or contain requests for irrelevant patient 
information. Conversely, harmful responses, while also incorrect, 
were determined by clinical judgment as potentially deleterious, such 
as advising suboptimal or contraindicated treatments. Furthermore, 
we assessed the completeness of the responses. For this purpose, we 
identified multiple specific keywords and terms for each unique medi-
cal scenario. These keywords represent expected interventions, such 
as treatments or diagnostic procedures and were carefully selected 
for their case relevance and crafted to be as specific as possible (for 
example, precise treatment combinations such as ‘FOLFOX and beva-
cizumab’ instead of ‘chemotherapy and antiangiogenic drugs’). This 
criterion, which we term ‘completeness’ , was supposed to measure the 
extent to which the agent’s response aligns with the essential informa-
tion that oncologists would anticipate in a human-generated answer 
under similar conditions.
Lastly, we evaluated the alignment of the responses with the 
original document segments used by the model through RAG. For 
each reference in the model’s output, we investigated the correspond-
ing reference by its source identifier. Our evaluation encompassed 
three critical dimensions: citation correctness, ensuring the model’s 
statements faithfully mirror the content of the original document, 
irrelevance, identifying instances where the model’s assertions are not 
substantiated by the source material, and incorrect citation, detecting 
discrepancies where the information attributed to a source diverges 
from its actual content.
All evaluations described here were performed independently 
by four certified clinicians with expertise in oncology. For all bench -
marks, we reported the majority vote. In cases of a tie, we selected the 
most adverse outcome, adhering to a hierarchical schema: correct, 
irrelevant and wrong for citations and correct, wrong and harmful for 
the correctness evaluation.
Data were analyzed using the pandas library and visualized with 
matplotlib in Python.
Statistics and reproducibility
Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally 
tested. Sample sizes were set at n  = 20. No statistical methods were 
used to predetermine sample sizes. Experiments were not randomized, 
as only one test group (the AI agent) existed in this proof-of-concept 
study. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experi-
ments and outcome assessment; however, they were blinded to the 
model responses while establishing the ground truth for the necessity 
of tool use and the completeness of the responses. Experiments were 
limited to n = 1 per case because of stringent rate and access limitations 
at the time of experimentation, when access to GPT-4V was available 
only as a preview. No data were excluded in the analysis. Reproducibility 
of the study’s findings may be affected by silent changes implemented 
to the model by its developers, which may not always be publicly dis-
closed, as well as by potential future model deprecations. Despite these 
factors, the results are expected to remain reproducible when using 
other current state-of-the-art models. Additionally, built-in guardrails 
designed to prevent potentially harmful content occasionally led to 
refusals and to inadequately addressing medical queries. In these 
instances, we reran each sample in newly instantiated settings until 
no such refusals occurred.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All radiology images used in this study are available from the respective 
URLs as indicated in the Supplementary Information. The histopathol-
ogy related results in our study are based upon data generated by TCGA 
Research Network (https://www.cancer.gov/tcga). Source data are 
provided with this paper.
Code availability
An implementation of our source codes for researchers to extend 
on our work is available from GitHub (https://github.com/Dyke-F/  
LLM_RAG_Agent). Instructions for using the repository are detailed in 
the respective ReadMe file.
References
1. Zhao, W. X. et al. A survey of large language models. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.18223 (2023).
2. OpenAI et al. GPT-4 technical report. Preprint at https://doi. 
org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774 (2023).
3. Nori, H., King, N., McKinney, S. M., Carignan, D. & Horvitz, E. 
Capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.13375 (2023).
4. Ferber, D. et al. GPT-4 for information retrieval and comparison of 
medical oncology guidelines. NEJM AI 1, AIcs2300235 (2024).
5. Acosta, J. N., Falcone, G. J., Rajpurkar, P. & Topol, E. J. Multimodal 
biomedical AI. Nat. Med. 28, 1773–1784 (2022).


--- PAGE 12 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349 1348
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
6. Lipkova, J. et al. Artificial intelligence for multimodal data 
integration in oncology. Cancer Cell 40, 1095–1110 (2022).
7. Khader, F. et al. Multimodal deep learning for integrating chest 
radiographs and clinical parameters: a case for transformers. 
Radiology 309, e230806 (2023).
8. Chen, R. J. et al. Pan-cancer integrative histology-genomic 
analysis via multimodal deep learning. Cancer Cell 40, 865–878 
(2022).
9. Lu, M. Y. et al. A multimodal generative AI copilot for human 
pathology. Nature 634, 466–473 (2024).
10. Moor, M. et al. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial 
intelligence. Nature 616, 259–265 (2023).
11. Tu, Tao et al. Towards generalist biomedical AI. NEJM AI 1, 
AIoa2300138 (2024).
12. Saab, K. et al. Capabilities of Gemini models in medicine. Preprint 
at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.18416 (2024).
13. Derraz, B. et al. New regulatory thinking is needed for AI-based 
personalised drug and cell therapies in precision oncology. NPJ 
Precis. Oncol. 8, 23 (2024).
14. Chen, Z. et al. MEDITRON-70B: scaling medical pretraining for 
large language models. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ 
arXiv.2311.16079 (2023).
15. Lewis, P. et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for 
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In NIPS '20: Proc. 34th 
International Conference on Neural Information Processing 
Systems 793, 9459–9474 (2020).
16. Zakka, C. et al. Almanac—retrieval-augmented language models 
for clinical medicine. NEJM AI 1, AIoa2300068 (2024).
17. Yao, S. et al. ReAct: synergizing reasoning and acting in language 
models. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.03629  
(2022).
18. Schick, T. et al. Toolformer: language models can teach 
themselves to use tools. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ 
arXiv.2302.04761 (2023).
19. Tayebi Arasteh, S. et al. Large language models streamline 
automated machine learning for clinical studies. Nat. Commun. 
15, 1603 (2024).
20. Messiou, C., Lee, R. & Salto-Tellez, M. Multimodal analysis and 
the oncology patient: creating a hospital system for integrated 
diagnostics and discovery. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 21, 
4536–4539 (2023).
21. Kather, J. N. et al. Deep learning can predict microsatellite 
instability directly from histology in gastrointestinal cancer. Nat. 
Med. 25, 1054–1056 (2019).
22. Ma, J. et al. Segment anything in medical images. Nat. Commun. 
15, 654 (2024).
23. Wagner, S. J. et al. Transformer-based biomarker prediction from 
colorectal cancer histology: a large-scale multicentric study. 
Cancer Cell 41, 1650–1661 (2023).
24. El Nahhas, O. S. M. et al. Joint multi-task learning improves weakly- 
supervised biomarker prediction in computational pathology. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.03891 (2024).
25. Chakravarty, D. et al. OncoKB: a precision oncology knowledge 
base. JCO Precis. Oncol. 2017, PO.17.00011 (2017).
26. He, X., Zhang, Y., Mou, L., Xing, E. & Xie, P. PathVQA: 30000+ 
questions for medical visual question answering. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.10286 (2020).
27. Adams, L. et al. LongHealth: a question answering benchmark 
with long clinical documents. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 
10.48550/arXiv.2401.14490 (2024).
28. Meta AI. Introducing Meta Llama 3: the most capable openly 
available LLM to date. Available online at https://ai.meta.com/ 
blog/meta-llama-3/ (2024).
29. Jiang, A. Q. et al. Mixtral of experts. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 
10.48550/arXiv.2401.04088 (2024).
30. Truhn, D., Reis-Filho, J. S. & Kather, J. N. Large language models 
should be used as scientific reasoning engines, not knowledge 
databases. Nat. Med. 29, 2983–2984 (2023).
31. Saillard, C. et al. Validation of MSIntuit as an AI-based 
pre-screening tool for MSI detection from colorectal cancer 
histology slides. Nat. Commun. 14, 6695 (2023).
32. OpenAI. GPT-4V(ision) system card. Available online at https:// 
cdn.openai.com/papers/GPTV_System_Card.pdf (2023).
33. Blankemeier, L. et al. Merlin: a vision language foundation model 
for 3D computed tomography. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 
10.48550/arXiv.2406.06512 (2024).
34. Chandler, C., Foltz, P. W. & Elvevåg, B. Improving the applicability 
of AI for psychiatric applications through human-in-the-loop 
methodologies. Schizophr. Bull. 48, 949–957 (2022).
35. Meta AI. The Llama 3 herd of models. Available online at https:// 
ai.meta.com/research/publications/the-llama-3-herd-of-models/  
(2024).
36. Teknium, R., Quesnelle, J. & Guang, C. Hermes 3 technical report. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.11857 (2024).
37. Xiong, G., Jin, Q., Lu, Z. & Zhang, A. Benchmarking 
retrieval-augmented generation for medicine. Preprint at https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.13178 (2024).
38. Bruch, S., Gai, S. & Ingber, A.An analysis of fusion functions for 
hybrid retrieval. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 42, 1–35 (2023).
39. Gemini Team Google et al. Gemini 1.5: unlocking multimodal 
understanding across millions of tokens of context. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.05530 (2024).
40. Zhou, H.-Y., Adithan, S., Acosta, J. N., Topol, E. J. & Rajpurkar, P. A 
generalist learner for multifaceted medical image interpretation. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.07988 (2024).
41. Brown, T. B. et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Preprint 
at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2005.14165 (2020).
42. Lammert, J. et al. Expert-guided large language models for 
clinical decision support in precision oncology. JCO Precis. 
Oncol. 8, e2400478 (2024).
43. Anthropic. The Claude 3 model family: Opus, Sonnet, 
Haiku. Available online at https://www-cdn.anthropic.com/
de8ba9b01c9ab7cbabf5c33b80b7bbc618857627/Model_Card_ 
Claude_3.pdf (2024).
44. Gilbert, S., Harvey, H., Melvin, T., Vollebregt, E. & Wicks, P. Large 
language model AI chatbos require approval as medical devices. 
Nat. Med. 29, 2396–2398 (2023).
45. Lyman, G. H. ASCO clinical practice guidelines and beyond. J. 
Oncol. Pract. 3, 330–331 (2007).
46. Ide, N. & Véronis, J. (eds) Text Encoding Initiative (Springer,  
1995).
47. Wang, X. et al. Transformer-based unsupervised contrastive 
learning for histopathological image classification. Med. Image 
Anal. 81, 102559 (2022).
48. El Nahhas, O. S. M. et al. From whole-slide image to biomarker 
prediction: a protocol for end-to-end deep learning in 
computational pathology. Nat. Protoc. 20, 293–316 (2025).
49. Khattab, O. et al. DSPy: compiling declarative language model 
calls into self-improving pipelines. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 
10.48550/arXiv.2310.03714 (2023).
50. Xiong, W. et al. Answering complex open-domain questions with 
multi-hop dense retrieval. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ 
arXiv.2009.12756 (2020).
51. Wei, J. et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large 
language models. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ 
arXiv.2201.11903 (2022).
52. The Cancer Imaging Archive. Preoperative CT and survival data 
for patients undergoing resection of colorectal liver metastases. 
Available online at https://www.cancerimagingarchive.net/ 
collection/colorectal-liver-metastases/ (2023).


--- PAGE 13 ---
Nature Cancer | Volume 6 | August 2025 | 1337–1349
 1349
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
53. Clark, K. et al. The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA): maintaining 
and operating a public information repository. J. Digit. Imaging 26, 
1045–1057 (2013).
54. Singhal, K. et al. Large language models encode clinical 
knowledge. Nature 620, 172–180 (2023).
Acknowledgements
J.N.K. is supported by the German Federal Ministry of Health (DEEP 
LIVER, ZMVI1-2520DAT111; SWAG, 01KD2215B), the Max-Eder Program 
of the German Cancer Aid (70113864), the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (PEARL, 01KD2104C; CAMINO, 01EO2101; 
SWAG, 01KD2215A; TRANSFORM LIVER, 031L0312A; TANGERINE, 
01KT2302 through ERA-NET Transcan), the German Academic 
Exchange Service (57616814), the German Federal Joint Committee 
(Transplant.KI, 01VSF21048), the European Union’s Horizon Europe and 
Innovation program (ODELIA, 101057091; GENIAL, 101096312) and the 
National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR, NIHR213331), 
Leeds Biomedical Research Center. D.T. is funded by the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (TRANSFORM LIVER, 
031L0312A), the European Union’s Horizon Europe and Innovation 
program (ODELIA, 101057091) and the German Federal Ministry of 
Health (SWAG, 01KD2215B). G.W. is supported by Lothian NHS. J.C. 
is supported by the Mildred-Scheel-Postdoktorandenprogramm of 
the German Cancer Aid (70115730). J.L. is supported by the TUM 
School of Medicine and Health Clinician Scientist Program (project 
no. H-08). J.L. receives intellectual and financial support through the 
DKTK School of Oncology Fellowship. S.F. is supported by the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (SWAG, 01KD2215A), the 
German Cancer Aid (DECADE, 70115166) and the German Research 
Foundation (504101714). The views expressed are those of the authors 
and not those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health and 
Social Care. No other funding is disclosed by any of the authors. 
In accordance with the Committee on Publication Ethics position 
statement of 13 February 2023 (https://publicationethics.org/cope- 
position-statements/ai-author), the authors hereby disclose the use 
of the following AI models during the writing of this article: GPT-4 
(OpenAI) for checking spelling and grammar.
Author contributions
D.F. designed and performed the experiments, evaluated and 
interpreted the results and wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. 
O.S.M.E.N. and G.W. provided scientific support for running the 
experiments and contributed to writing the manuscript. I.C.W. 
contributed to writing the manuscript. J.C., M.E.L., I.C.W. and D.F. 
evaluated the models. S.F., J.L., M.T., M.S.T. and N.S. provided feedback 
and contributed to writing the manuscript. D.J. supervised the study. 
D.T. and J.N.K. designed and supervised the experiments and wrote the 
manuscript. All authors contributed scientific advice and approved 
the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
O.S.M.E.N. holds shares in StratifAI. J.N.K. declares consulting 
services for Owkin, DoMore Diagnostics, Panakeia and Scailyte, 
holds shares in Kather Consulting, StratifAI and Synagen and has 
received honoraria for lectures and advisory board participation from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Eisai, MSD, BMS, Roche, Pfizer and Fresenius. 
D.T. has received honoraria for lectures by Bayer and holds shares in 
StratifAI and holds shares in Synagen. D.F. holds shares in Synagen. 
M.S.T. is a scientific advisor to Mindpeak and Sonrai Analytics and  
has received honoraria from BMS, MSD, Roche, Sanofi and Incyte. 
S.F. has received honoraria from MSD and BMS. The remaining 
authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6.
Supplementary information The online version  
contains supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Jakob Nikolas Kather.
Peer review information Nature Cancer thanks Anant Madabhushi, 
Arsela Prelaj, Pranav Rajpurkar and Wayne Zhao for their contribution 
to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
1Department of Medical Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. 2Else Kroener 
Fresenius Center for Digital Health, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 3School of Computer Science, University of St Andrews, 
St Andrews, UK. 4Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany. 5Department of Medicine 
III, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. 6Department of Medicine I, University Hospital Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 7Institute of 
Pathology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 8Department of Gynecology and Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, 
University Hospital rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany. 9Center for Personalized Medicine (ZPM), University 
Hospital rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany. 10German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Munich, Germany. 
11European Network for Rare Cancers (EURACAN) Initiative, Munich, Germany. 12Google Cloud, Munich, Germany. 13Integrated Pathology Unit, 
Institute for Cancer Research and Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK. 14Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. 15Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany. 
 e-mail: jakob-nikolas.kather@alumni.dkfz.de


--- PAGE 14 ---
Nature Cancer
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Nature Cancer
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-025-00991-6
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Patient case population and bias investigation. We show 
more details on the simulated patient cases from our benchmarking experiments 
including the sex (A) and age (B) distribution for all 20 cases. The pie chart in C 
shows the proportions of patient origins by country and ethnicity. For 55% of the 
patients, we did not provide this information in the patient case vignette (n/a), 
while the remaining 45% included diverse information on patient origin. (D)  To  
investigate whether gender, age, and origin influence the models’ tool-calling 
behavior, we conducted an additional experiment with 15 random permutations 
on all 20 patient cases (300 in total). Notably, we observed that in contrary to 
patient cases requiring relatively fewer tools (for example, patients Adams, 
Lopez and Williams), there was higher variability in tool-calling behavior in 
situations requiring more tools (for example, patient Ms Xing), regardless of the 
combinations of age, sex, and ethnicity/origin. Heatmaps are annotated on the 
x-axis as ‘age-sex-ethnicity/country of origin’ .


--- PAGE 16 ---



--- PAGE 17 ---



--- PAGE 18 ---
